In this video, we're going to
look at how to use custom number
formatting as an alternative
to conditional formats.
Conditional formats are great.
So why would we look
for an alternative?
Well, we've already
seen that we're quite
restricted in terms
of our icon choices.
So that's one reason.
Another reason is with
very large datasets,
you may find you start to get
performance issues with
conditional formatting.
Custom number formats are
about three times more efficient.
In this example, Ron
would like to have
some icons for our
core waste production,
very similar to those,
as we have for our
resource recovery rates.
The differences is, he would like
all the positive values to have
a red triangle pointing
upwards and the
negative values to have
a green triangle
pointing downwards.
With the conditional formatting
icons available to us,
this is not possible.
So he's going to have to
use a custom number format.
Before we solve that
problem though,
let's take a moment to
understand how
number formats work.
If you click on cell where
no formatting has been applied,
you will see it is
set to general,
which means no format.
You can however, go and apply
one of the standard formats.
For example, if I
click the drop-down,
there are a whole lot of
standard formats to choose from,
including currency,
accounting, and percentage.
If you don't want any
of those, however,
you can create your own
custom number format.
To do that, there
are few options.
You can click on
the dialog launcher at
the bottom of the
number format group,
or the keyboard
shortcut is Control 1.
When we open up our
Format Cells dialog,
you see it's gone to
the Number format tab,
and at the moment these numbers
are formatted as percentage.
To create a custom
format, we select Custom.
We then type in the formatting
we want in the type box,
and we'll see a sample
come up over here.
For example, if I were
to put another zero,
you'll see the sample change to
show me two decimal places.
I'm going to go back to one.
With custom number formats,
we have the option to
specify how our
positive values look,
how our negative values look,
how zeros are formatted,
and how text is formatted.
So four options, and each is
separated by a semicolon.
You don't have to
specify all of them and
we're not going to worry
to specify the text.
With this first example,
what we'd like to
do is have all of
our positive values turn green,
our negative values show as red,
and our zeros not show all.
Right at the beginning
before the zero,
I'm going to type
a bracket and type
the word green and close
my square bracket.
This is saying show
positive values as
green in the format 0.0 percent.
I'm then going to
type a semicolon.
The next section is how my
negative values should look.
I'm going open my square
bracket, type red,
close my square bracket and
make it minus 0.0 percent.
Then I'm going to type
another semicolon,
and in this section
I specify how I want
my zero values to
look and I don't want
to see them at all.
So I'm going to leave
that completely empty.
When I now click ''Okay'',
my custom number format
has been applied.
That's the principle.
We now want to
use icons instead of
those percentages.
First thing we're
going to need to
do is actually get the icons.
I'm going to click into "I3",
we just need a blank cell here,
and we're going to come to
our Insert tab on our ribbon,
and on the far right
you'll find symbols.
You'll choose Symbols and Symbol,
and there are a lot of
alphabets you can choose from.
For example, if I were
to type in Wingdings,
you'll see we've got
Wingdings, Wingdings 2,
Wingdings 3, and coming
in here, lots of symbols.
The downside of using
something like Wingdings
is you'll need to
remember to change the font
in that column to be Wingdings,
and if somebody changes
it to something else,
you're going to lose your icon.
You're probably safer of going
with a standard font like Arial.
I'm going go back to Arial.
Again, there are lots of
icons you can choose from,
but you can narrow
down the subsets.
I'm going click the
drop-down and scroll
down till you get to
geometric shapes.
You will need to scroll
down quite a bit.
In the Geometric Shapes section,
we don't get a massive selection,
but we get some smiley
faces which are good,
and we get the ones we need,
the up arrow and the down arrow.
I'm going to double-click on
the up arrow and double-click
on the down arrow,
and then just click ''Close''.
Then let's copy
those so we've got
them on our clipboard
when we need them,
so Control C and Enter.
Now we don't actually want
these percentages to disappear.
We want to see the icon
in the column next to it.
Let's do what we did previously.
I'm going to come
into J5, type equals,
click on "I5" and
press ''Enter''.
Then I'm going to
select the value
and double-click to copy down.
We're now going to
replace the formatting in
this column with our
own custom format.
Keyboard shortcut, Control 1,
and here's our number
format dialog.
Again, we're going
to choose Custom,
and then where we've
got the type box,
we're actually going to
remove that altogether.
You can see it's gone to General.
Now we've decided that
with our positive values,
we actually want to see them
as red in this example.
I'm going to open my square
bracket and type red,
close my square bracket,
and then I'm going
to paste my icons.
So Control V and Backspace
to remove the down arrow.
What I'm saying here is,
if the value is positive,
I want it to show a red triangle.
Now type a semicolon.
If it's negative, I
want the green color,
so I'm going to type green,
close my square bracket.
Again, paste Control V,
but this time remove
your upward triangle
and leave your downward triangle.
If it's neither, I want
to leave it empty.
I'm just going to type a
semicolon and then say Okay.
Looks very much like
a conditional format,
but that's actually a
custom number format.
We can further refine these.
Ron has two issues with this.
The first thing is he
doesn't necessarily want
to apply it to positives
and negatives.
He actually wants to apply
the red triangles if the
value is one percent or over,
and he want to apply
the green triangle if
it's below negative one percent.
So that's the first issue.
The second issue is,
he's not that excited
about that green,
he'd like to go for a
slightly darker green.
Now, we actually have a
large selection of colors we
can apply for custom
number formats,
and these have all been
documented in your toolbox.
You can go and use
that as a reference.
For this example, the green
color we want is number 10.
We're going to change
that green to number 10.
Again, with your cell selected,
we're going to press ''Control
1'' and get our
number format open.
The first thing we're
going to do is,
we're going to replace the green,
so I'm actually
going to select that
and I'm going to type color,
C-O-L-O-R, the American spelling,
followed by the number I want.
That's going to replace
the green for me.
The next thing I need to
do is add those ranges,
and I'm going to start
with the first one.
I'm just going to
click just before
the square bracket in red,
and I'm going to add another
set of square brackets.
So open my square bracket,
and I'm going to say that I only
want to see the
red up triangle if
the value is greater than 0.01,
and then close my
square brackets.
Remember we're working
with percentages.
Then I'm going to do the
same for my green one,
my color 10, open
my square brackets,
but here I only want
to see it if it's
less than minus 0.01,
and close my square bracket.
If it doesn't fit into
either of those ranges,
I'm just going to
show the color black.
That's just going to
make sure that I don't
get something odd showing up.
There's our custom number format.
I'm now going to click ''Okay'',
and you'll see the green has
altered to a slightly
more muted green,
and we're only getting the
icons for the ranges we want.
Enormously powerful
and actually easier to
do with custom number formats
in conditional formatting.
There's a really
handy alternative
if you're concerned about
performance issues,
or you want to use
your own icons.
In the tool box, we've documented
a more complete set of rules
for how to work with
custom number formats.
So good idea to go
and check that out.
Don't forget to do this
week's practice challenge,
which will give you
great practice with
all the skills we've learned
this week. Have fun with it.